Okay. So in this video we're going to
begin our discussion about why Prim's
algorithm is correct.
Why always, for every connected graph
outputs a minimum spanning tree of that
graph.
For this video, we're going to content
ourselves with a much more modest school.
We're only going to prove for now the
Prim's algorithm outputs a spanning tree.
We're not going to make any claims yet
about optimality.
Even just this fact is not trivial and
proving it will give us a good
opportunity to get our hands dirty with
some basic properties of graphs and
specifically graph cuts.
Graduates of part 1 of this online class
of course are already familiar with graph
cuts. We studied them at length via
Karger's randomized algorithm for
computing the minimum cut of a graph.
So, the concept is the same here, let me
state it again to jog your memory.
So a cut of a graph is simply a partition
of its vertex set, two groups, and each
of those two groups should be non-empty.
So pictorially, we envision some of the
vertices of G, this blob A being in one
group,
and the rest of the vertices, this graph
B being in a different group.
Now, what's up with the edges?
How can they be distributed in this
picture?
Well, the two endpoints of an edge,
there's three cases,
either both of the endpoints can be in
the set A.
So there's various edges internal to A.
Similarly, an edge might have both of its
endpoints inside of B.
But we're going to be most interested in
the third case,
edges that have one point exactly in each
of A and B.
So these are edges that we say cross the
cut, A, B.
So hopefully the definition of a cut
seems simple enough, but cuts in
particular their relationship to edges
can be quite interesting, quite useful.
So as shown here in the picture, of
course for a given cut, there can be many
edges crossing it.
by the same token for a given edge of a
graph, in general, there will be many
cuts of the grap,
that's, that edge crosses.
So, to understand this a little bit
better, let's just review a simple
property that cuts through the graph.
Let me just ask you just how many there
are.
Specifically, for a graph that has n
vertices, roughly how many cuts does it
have?
Roughly n, roughly n squared, roughly
2^n, or roughly n^n?
Now, none of these four answers is
exactly right, but one of the four is a
lot closer to the exact expression than
the other three and I'm asking you, which
of them is it?
Alright.
So the correct answer is the third one,
2^n.
A graph of n vertices has essentially 2^n
cut, so there's an exponential number of
cuts there's a lot of them.
So why is this true?
Well, in effect you can imagine making a
binary decision for each of the n
vertices.
They either go into A.
What were they going to be?
So n binary decisions results in 2^n
different outcomes.
Now why is this slightly incorrect?
Well, in fact, a cut has to have two
non-empty sets.
A is not allowed to be empty,
B is not allowed to be empty,
so that rules out two of the
possibilities.
So actually, strictly speaking, it's 2^n
- 1 different cuts of a graph.
So what we're going to do next is we're
going to state and prove three easy facts
about cuts in graphs.
Once we have these three easy facts, we
will be able to prove the claim at the
beginning of this video,
namely the Prim's Algorithm always
outputs a spanning tree.
The first of these three properties about
cuts, I'm going to call the empty cuts
lemma.
The point of the empty cut lemma is to
give us a characterization that is a new
way of saying when a graph is connected.
So in particular, I'm going to phrase in
terms of a graph not connected.
And the claim is that a graph is not
connected if and only if we can find a
cut of the graph that has no edges
crossing it.
So remember how we defined a graph being
connected,
that means for any two vertices in the
graph we can find a path in the graph
from one vertex to the other.
So what we're saying is that being not
connected,
that is, there existing a pair of
vertices with no path between them is
equivalent to there being a cut with no
crossing edges.
So let's go ahead and prove this real
quick.
So as an if and only if statement,
really this proof, we have to do in two
parts.
First, we have to prove that assuming the
first statement, we can derive the
second.
Then we have to show that assuming the
second statement, we can derive the
first.
I think the easier direction is to assume
the right-hand side and then derive the
left-hand side.
So let's start with that one.
That is, consider a graph G so that
there's a cut, A, B with no edges of G
crossing this cut.
The plan is to exhibit a pair of vertices
that do not have a path between them,
there, thereby certifying that the graph
is not connected.
So, it's pretty easy to figure out which
pair of vertices we should look at,
just take one vertex from each side of
the cut which has no crossing edges.
So why is it that there's no path from U
to V in the graph G?
Well the path from U to V would surely
have to cross the cuts, A, B, but there's
no edges available for crossing the cut.
So therefore, this path from U to V
cannot exist.
So that completes the first part of the
proof. We assume the right-hand side, we
derive the left-hand side,
now we start all over again, but we
assume the left-hand side and we have to
prove the right-hand side.
So by virtue of, by the assumption that
the graph is not connected, there has to
exist a pair of verticies U and V that
have no path between them.
We are now responsible for exhibiting
some cut A, B such that no edges of the
graph G crossing.
So where are we going to get these sets
capital A and capital B from?
Well, here is the trick, which is going
to make the proof go really nicely.
We define the set of verticies of capital
A to be those reachable from U in the
graph G.
Another way to think about this is that
capital A is simply used connected
components in the sense that we discussed
in part 1 of the course.
Now because we want to cut and a cut is
our partition, we better well put in the
group, capital B, all of the verticies
that are not in A.
If you like, this is all of the connected
components other than the one that
contains U.
Note that by definition, U is in capital
A,
certainly U is reachable from itself.
And by assumption, V and U are not
reachable from each other,
so V is going to be in capital B.
So neither of these sets is non-empty.
This is indeed a bonafide cut of the
graph G.
All that remains is to notice that there
are no crossing edges across this cut.
And why is that true?
Well, if there was an edge crossing the
cut A, B with one endpoint in A, one
endpoint in B. Well, by definition, there
are paths from U to everything else in A,
so if there is any edge sticking out of
A, that would give us a path to some
vertex in B.
But, B definition of vertices not
reachable from capital A, so that's a
contradiction.
So again, the point is that if there were
edges crossing this cut, then we can
expand A and make it even bigger. So
therefore, there aren't any edges
crossing the cut.
The cut is empty, that's what we needed
to prove.
Assuming the graph was disconnected, we
have exhibited a cut, A, B with no
crossing edges.
So that wraps up of the first of our
three facts, and in fact, the most
difficult of our three facts about cuts
in graphs.
And again,, what did the empty cut lemma
say?
It gives us a new way of talking about
whether or not a graph is connected.
So it's disconnected if and only if
there's an empty cut.
It's connected if and only if there are
no empty cuts.
So that's the keypoint from this slide.
Let's now knock off the other two facts
we're going to need.
The first one I'm going to call the
double crossing lemma.
In essence, what the double crossing
lemma says, is that, if a cycle in a
graph crosses a cut, then it has to cross
it twice,
it cannot cross it only once.
So pictorially, we look at a cut of a
graph, so there's the two vertex groups A
and B.
By hypothesis, there's some edge E with
one endpoint in each side,
and by assumption, this E, this edge E,
participates in some cycle that we're
calling capital C.
And if you look at the picture, you
realize that the claim in this lemma is
obvious,
that, because the cycle has to loop back
on itself, if it has an edge with one
endpoint on either side, there has to be
a path connecting the two dots,
connecting those two endpoints back to
each other and that path has to cross
back for, over this cut A,
B.
Indeed, the double crossing lemma is a
special case of a stronger statement
which is equally easier to see, which is
that if you take any cut of a graph and
you take any cycle you know, it starts
and ends at the same point,
then it has to cross this cut an even
number of times.
It might cross it 0 times, but it's not
going to cross it once.
It could cross it twice.
It could cross it four times, if it
crisscrosses back and forth.
It could cross it six times, and so on.
But if it crosses it strictly more than 0
times, then it has to cross it at least
twice.
That's the point of the double crossing
lemma.
So, we'll use this in its own rights
later on.
But I'm also, for the moment, interested
in easy corollary of the double crossing
lemma.
I will call this the lonely cut
corollary.
Let me tell you the point of the lonely
cut corollary.
In general, in these spanning tree
algorithms,
to ensure that we output a spanning tree,
then we have to, in particular, make sure
we don't create any cycles.
The point of this corollary is it's a
tool to argue that we don't create
cycles.
So how can we be sure that an edge
doesn't create cycles? Well, here is a
way.
Suppose there's a cut, so we're looking
at an edge E, suppose we can identify a
cut A, B so that edge E is the only cut
crossing it, it's the lonely edge
crossing this cut.
Well then, by the double crossing lemma,
there is no way this thing is in any
cycle.
If it were in a cycle and a cross to cut,
that cycle would have to cross it again
and it's edge wouldn't be lonely, it
would have company.
So if you're lonely on a cut, it mean's
you cannot be in a cycle.
So now we've got all of our ducks lined
up in a row and we're ready to prove the
first part of the correctness of Prim.
That is, we're ready to argue that Prim's
algorithm, given a connected graph,
outputs a spanning tree.
Again, for the moment, we're making no
claims about optimality, that will be in
the next video.
So we're going to make this argument in
three steps.
And for the first step, you might want to
go look again at the pseudocode of Prim's
algorithm just to remember what the
notation was.
The first step, we're just going to
notice that the semantics of the
algorithm are respected.
So the algorithm maintains two different
sets throughout its evolution.
On the one hand it maintains a set
capital x, intended to be the vertices
spanned so far.
The other hand, it maintains a set of
edges, capital T, the edges that have
been picked so far.
And the intent was that the current edges
capital T always spans the current vertex
at capital x.
So the first thing is just to verify that
that is in fact true.
This I'm not going to prove formally.
In my experience, students find this kind
of obvious and the intuition is correct.
if you want a rigorous proof, go go ahead
and fill in the details yourself.
It's a straightforward induction with no
nasty surprises.
[SOUND] Now, we're trying to argue the
output of this algorithm is a spanning
tree.
So let's recall what that means.
What is it that we have to check?
So there's two properties.
First of all, there can't be any cycles,
there can't be any loops.
Second of all, it has to span all of the
vertices.
It has to be a path inside the tree edges
from any vertex to any other vertex.
So let's go ahead and prove both those
things in reverse order.
So, the second step of the proof is going
to be to argue that the algorithm outputs
something which does span all of the
vertices.
So at the end of the day, we'll have a
path from any vertex to any other vertex
using only the edges in our chosen set,
capital T. Now, by part one of this
proof, all we need to prove is that the
algorithm halts with capital X equal to
capital V, then we know that capital T
spans everything in V.
So how could that not happen?
How could Prim's algorithm somehow halts
with this spanned vertices capital X, not
being all of capital B,? We'll go back
and check out the pseudocode and look at
the main wild loop.
So every wild loop, every iteration, we
add one new vertex to capital X. What
could go wrong? The only thing that could
go wrong would be is if some iteration,
before we're spanning everything, when we
scan the frontier around capital X, there
aren't any edges.
That's the only way we can fail to
increase the vertices in capital X in a
given duration.
But what would that mean?
What would it mean if in some iteration
we couldn't find edges with one endpoint
in capital X and the other endpoint in V
- X?
Well then we would have exhibited an
empty cut.
The cut X, V - X would have no crossing
edges.
And now we can use the empty cut lemma,
which says if there's an empty cut, then
the graph is disconnected.
But by assumption, we're working with a
connected input graph, so that can't
happen.
Okay? So the algorithm never gets stuck,
we always increase capital X by one
vertex because the original graph was
connected, that means that halt was
something spanning all of the verticies.
For the final step, we need to argue that
Prim's algorithm never creates any cycles
in the edges that it, it's choosing
capital T.
So, why are there no cycles?
Well, what we're going to do is we're
going to talk about each edge in turn,
the Prim's algorithm adds,
and argue that whenever a new edge gets
added, there's no way that edge creates
any cycles in the set capital T.
And, to see why, take a snapshot of the
algorithm of some given iteration,
to the sum current set capital T, and
there's some set verticies capital X that
the edges in T span.
V - X to the verticies not yet spanned by
T and of course we can think of X, V - X
as a cut of the graph.
And at this moment in time, at this
snapshot, the edges of capital T, they're
all of one type.
They all have both of their endpoints
inside capital X, none of them have any
endpoints inside V - X.
So in particular, none of the edges
chosen thus far cross the cut X, V - X.
That's by construction, they only span
the verticies of X.
Now what type of edge is going to get
added in this iteration.
Well, Prim's algorithm searches only over
edges that have one endpoint inside X and
one endpoint outside.
That is, it searches only over edges that
cross the cut X, V - X.
So the edge that gets added in this
iteration is going to be a trailblazer
for this cut.
None of the edges yet shows and cross the
cut,
but the edge showed in this iteration
will definitely, cross the cut.
So the moment edge E gets added to the
tree capital T, it is going to be lonely
across the cut V sorry, X, V - X.
So by the lonely cut corollary as the
sole member crossing this cut in capital
T, it cannot possibly participate in any
cycles.
Remember, if it participated in a cycle
in capital T, that cycle would have to
cross this cut somewhere else.
But there aren't any other edges crossing
this cut, this is the only one.
So that's why when we add a new edge,
there's no way it can create any cycles.
It's the sole member crossing this
particular cut.